# Chapter 8. Sorting in Linear Time

## Chapter 8.1 Lower bounds for sorting

In a comparison sort, we use only comparisons between elements to gain order information about an input sequence a<sub>1</sub>, a<sub>2</sub>, ..., a<sub>n</sub>. That is, given two elements a<sub>i</sub> and a<sub>j</sub>, we perform one of the tests a<sub>i</sub> < a<sub>j</sub>, a<sub>i</sub> &le; a<sub>j</sub>, a<sub>i</sub> = a<sub>j</sub>, a<sub>i</sub> &ge; a<sub>j</sub> or a<sub>i</sub> > a<sub>j</sub> to determine their relative order. 

In this section, we assume without loss of generality that all the input elements are distinct. Given this assumption, comparisons of the form a<sub>i</sub> = a<sub>j</sub> are uselss, so we can assume that no comparisons of this form are made. We also note that the comparisons a<sub>i</sub> &le; a<sub>j</sub>, a<sub>i</sub> &ge; a<sub>j</sub>, a<sub>i</sub> > a<sub>j</sub>, and a<sub>i</sub> < a<sub>j</sub> are all equivalent in that they yeild identical information about the relative order of a<sub>i</sub> and a<sub>j</sub>. We therefore assume that all comparisons have the form a<sub>i</sub> < a<sub>j</sub>.

**The decision-tree model**

We can view comparison sorts abstractly in terms of decision trees. A decision tree is a full binary tree that represents the comparisons between elements that are performed by a particular sorting algorithm operating on an input of a given size. In a decision tree, we annotate each internal node by i:j for some i and j in the range 1 &le; i, j &le;n, where n is the number of elements in the input sequence. We also annotate each leaf by a permutation &pi;(1), &pi;(2), ..., &pi;(n). The execution of the sorting algorithm corresponds to tracing a simple path from the root of the decision tree down to a leaf. Each internal node indicates a comparison a<sub>i</sub> &le; a<sub>j</sub>. The left subtree then dictates a subsequent comparisons once we know that a<sub>i</sub> &le; a<sub>j</sub>, and the right subtree dictates subsequent comparisons knowing that a<sub>i</sub> > a<sub>j</sub>. When we come to a leaf, the sorting algorithm has established the ordering a<sub>&pi;(1)</sub> &le; a<sub>&pi;(2)</sub> &le; ... &le; a<sub>&pi;(n)</sub>. Because any correct sorting algorithm must be able to produce each permutation of its input, each of the n! permutations on n elements must appear as one of the leaves of the decision tree for a comparison sort to be correct. Furthermore, each of these leaves must be reachable from the root by a downward path corresponding to an actual execution of the comparison sort. Thus, we shall consider only decision trees in which each permutation appears as a reachable leaf.

